# Solvable Groups

## Introduction

***Definition.*** A group $G$ is said to be *solvable* if it has an *abelian series*, that is, a subnormal series whose factors are all abelian. The length of the shortest abelian series of a group is called its *derived length*. Thus, the only group of dervied length $0$ is the trivial group, whereas the groups of dervied length $1$ are precisely the abelian groups. Groups of derived length $2$ are called *metabelian*. 

***Notation.*** On this page, $l(G)$ will denote the derived length of $G$.

***Definition.*** A groups is said to be *polycyclic* if it has a subnormal series whose factors are all cyclic.

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Suppose $G$ is a solvable group, and $1 = G_0 \le \cdots \le G_n = G$ an abelian series. If $H$ is a subgroup of $G$, then $H_k = G_k \cap H$ is an abelian series for $H$. In particular, $H$ is solvable, and the inequality $l(H) \le l(G)$ holds.

*Proof.* TODO.
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Suppose $G$ is a solvable group, and $1 = G_0 \le \cdots \le G_n = G$ an abelian series. If $N$ is a normal subgroup of $G$, then $N_k = G_kN/N$ is an abelian series for $N$. In particular, $N$ is solvable, and the inequality $l(N) \le l(G)$ holds. 

*Proof.* TODO.
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Suppose $A$ and $B$ are solvable groups, and $G$ is an extension of $B$ by $A$. Moreover, let $1 = A_0 \le \cdots \le A_n = A$ be an abelian series for $A$, and  $1 = B_0 \le \cdots \le B_m = B$ be an abelian series for $B$. Then, we can obtain an abelian series for $G$ (up to isomorphism) by considering
<div>$$ 1 = A_0 \le \cdots \le A_n = \pi^{-1}(B_0) \le \cdots \le \pi^{-1}(B_m) = G $$</div>
where $\pi: G \to G/A \cong B$ is the natural projection. In particular, $G$ is solvable, and the inequality $l(G) \le l(A) + l(B)$ holds.

*Proof.* TODO.
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

Solvable groups appear everywhere around us. The following two theorems should show just how frequent they are, especially in the theory of finite groups.

***Theorem.*** (Feit-Thompson) Every finite group of odd order is solvable.

The Feit-Thompson theorem is a jewel of group theory, and far above what we can prove with the tools presented on this site. The following result, Burnside's $p^aq^b$ theorem, is of similar nature but much easier to prove. We will look at it more deeply when studying the representation theory of groups. 

***Theorem.*** (Burnside) Every finite group of order $p^aq^b$, where $p$ and $q$ are prime, is solvable.

We will also be able to prove the following theorem.

***Theorem.*** Let $G$ be a finite group such that $|G|$ is square-free. Then, $G$ is solvable.

## Commutators

## The Commutator Subgroup

***Definition.*** The *commutator subgroup* of a group $G$ is the subgroup generated by all commutators.
<div>$$ G' = [G, G] = \langle [x, y] \mid x, y \in G \rangle $$</div>
We also define the *higher commutator subgroups* as follows. First, $G^{(0)}$ is just the initial group $G$. Then, we define $G^{(n + 1)}$ inductively as $[G^{(n)}, G^{(n)}]$. Together, they form the *derived series* of $G$.
<div>$$ G = G^{(0)} \supseteq G^{(1)} \supseteq G^{(2)} \supseteq \cdots $$</div>

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** All commutator subgroups of a group $G$ are characteristic. In particular, they are normal subgroups, and hence the derived series is a normal series.

*Proof.* It will suffice to prove that $G' \char G$, since a characteristic subgroup of a characteristic subgroup is characteristic in the initial group. Let $\phi: G \to G$ be an automorphism. Since $G'$ is generated by all commutators $[x, y]$, it is enough to show that $\phi([x, y]) = [\phi(x), \phi(y)]$. This is easy enough to prove by direct computation, starting from the definition of the commutator.
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Let $G$ be a group and $H$ a subgroup. Then, $H^{(n)} \le G^{(n)}$ for all non-negative integers $n$.

*Proof.* It will suffice to prove that $H' \le G'$. Note that every commutator $[h_1, h_2]$ with $h_1, h_2 \in H$ is also contained in $G'$, thus the subgroup they generate, $H'$, is also part of $G'$.
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

***Definition.*** Suppose $G$ is a group. We define its *abelianization* to be $G_{\ab}$, the quotient of $G$ by its commutator subgroup $G'$.

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** The abelianization of a group $G$ is indeed an abelian group. Moreover, it is the greatest abelian group that can be obtained as a quotient of $G$. In formal language, if $G/N$ is abelian, then $G'$ is a subgroup of $N$.

*Proof.* To show $G_{\ab}$ is abelian, we will prove that $[x, y] = e$ for any $x, y \in G_{\ab}$. Indeed, if $\pi: G \to G_{\ab}$ is the natural projection, we may find $a, b \in G$ such that $x = \pi(a)$ and $y = \pi(b)$. We find $[x, y] = \pi([a, b])$, and hence $[x, y] = e$, since all commutators are in $\ker \pi$.

Now, suppose $N$ is normal in $G$ such that $G/N$ is abelian. We similarly consider the natural projetion $\rho: G \to G/N$, and note that $\rho([a, b]) = [\rho(a), \rho(b)] = e$. Thus, all commutators of $G$ are in $N$, whence the subgroup generated by them, the commutator subgroup, is contained in $N$.
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

***Corollary.*** The factors of the derived series are commutative.

## The Dervied Series and Solvability

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Suppose $G$ is a solvable group, and $ 1 = G_0 \le G_1 \le \cdots \le G_n = G $ is an abelian series. Then, $G^{(k)} \le G_{n - k}$ for all $0 \le k \le n$.

*Proof.* We will proceed by induction on $k$. The base case is trivial; it reduces to $G = G$. Now, suppose $G^{(k)} \le G_{n - k}$ for some $0 \le k < n$. Since $G_{n - k}/G_{n - (k + 1)}$ is abelian, the group $G_{n - (k + 1)}$ must contain the commutator subgroup of $G_{n - k}$. Thus, it contains $[G_{n - k}, G_{n - k}]$, which certainly is a superset of $[G^{(k)}, G^{(k)}] = G^{(k + 1)}$, as desired.
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** A group $G$ is solvable if and only if $G^{(n)} = 1$ for some integer $n \ge 0$. The smallest such $n$ is equal to the derived length of $G$.

*Proof.* Let us first note that whenever the derived series ends in the trivial group, it is an abelian series. Indeed, its factors are abelian, and since it is normal it must be subnormal as well. Now, suppose $G$ is solvable and let $1 = G_0 \le \cdots \le G_l = G$ be a shortest solvable series. Since $G^{(l)} \le G_{l - l} = G_0 = 1$, we find that the dervied series ends in $1$, and has length at most $l$. At the same time, since it terminates, it must be an abelian series, whence its length is at least $l$. Thus, the least $n$ satisfying $G^{(n)} = 1$ is precisely the derived length of $G$.
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>


<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** A group $G$ is solvable if and only if it has a normal series with abelian factors.

*Proof.* Any such normal series is an abelian series, hence its existence implies the solvability of the group. Converesely, it $G$ is solvable, then its derived series is normal with abelian factors.
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

## The Commutator Subgroup and Extensions

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Let $G$ and $H$ be two groups. Then, $(G \times H)^{(n)}$ is isomorphic to $G^{(n)} \times H^{(n)}$.

*Proof.* TODO
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div><div class="compact" markdown>

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Let $G = N \ltimes H$ be a semidirect product. Then, $[G, G] = \langle [N, N], [H, H], [N, H] \rangle$.

*Proof.* TODO
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div><div class="compact" markdown>

## TODO

Equality case for $l(G) \le l(A) + l(B)$.

Finish proofs with TODO.

Write about commutators