# Subgroups

## Introduction

## Basics of subgroups

***Definition.*** A *subgroup* of a group $(G, \cdot)$ is a non-empty subset $H$ such that $(H, \cdot)$ is a group. In this case, we write $H \leq G$ to signal that $H$ is a subgroup of $G$. If $H$ is a proper subset, we call it a *proper subgroup*, and write $H < G$. We might also call $G$ a *supergroup* or an *overgroup* of $H$.

Subgroups are as compatible as can be with the structure of their overgroups.

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** If $H$ is a subgroup of $G$, then $H$ and $G$ have the same identity, and the inverse of any element of $H$ is the same as its inverse in $G$. 

*Proof.* Let us first prove that $e_G = e_H$. Indeed, $e_H^2 = e_H$ since it is the identity in $H$. Multiplying by $e_H^{-1}$ (the inverse in $G$), we get $e_H = e_G$. Now it is clear that the inverses are also the same.
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

***Remark.*** We could have required this from the get go, since the point of a subgroup is to be a smaller part (a subset) that retains all the structure it can from its overgroup. It is nice, however, to know that it is not necessary to assume so many properties. It is enough to require that $H$ is a subset and a group (with respect to the same operation).

It should be easy enough for the reader to prove that $\{e_G\}$ is a subgroup for any group $G$.

***Definition.*** We will call $\{e_G\}$ the *trivial subgroup* of $G$.

This also tells us that any group has at least one subgroup, and that the only group having exactly one subgroup is the trivial one.

The following theorem gives us a shortcut when proving a subset is a subgroup.

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Let $G$ be a group and $H \subset G$ a non-empty subset. Then $H$ is a subgroup iff $xy^{-1} \in H$ for any elements $x, y \in H$.

*Proof.* The direct statement is obvious from the closer of a group under its operation. Now suppose $H$ is non-empty and satisfies $xy^{-1} \in H$ for any $x, y \in H$. Let $a \in H$ be some element. Then, the identity $e = aa^{-1}$ is in $H$. Consequently, we find that for any $x \in H$, we also have $ex^{-1} = x^{-1}$ in $H$, that is, $H$ is closed under inverses. Now suppose $x$ and $y$ are elements of $H$. We first get that $y^{-1} \in H$, then that $x(y^{-1})^{-1} = xy \in H$. Finally, $H$ is closed under multiplication, inverses, and has identity, hence it is a subgroup of $G$.
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

## Intersections and unions of subgroups

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Let $G$ be a group and $\{H_i\}_{i \in I}$ a family of subgroups. Then, their intersection $\bigcap_{i \in I}{H_i}$ is a subgroup as well.

*Proof.* 
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Let $G$ be a group and $H$ and $K$ two subgroups. Then, their union $H \cup K$ is a subgroup iff $H \subset K$ or $K \subset H$.

*Proof.* 
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Let $G$ be a group and $\{H_i\}_{i \in I}$ a directed family of subgroups. Then, their union $\bigcup_{i \in I}{H_i}$ is a subgroup as well.

*Proof.* 
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

***Corollary.*** Let $G$ be a group and $H_1 \subset H_2 \subset \ldots$ a sequence of subgroups. Then, their union $\bigcup_{n = 1}^{\infty}{H_n}$ is a subgroup as well. 

## Generated subgroup

***Definition.*** Suppose $G$ is a group and consider a subset $S$. We define the *subgroup generated by $S$* to be the intersection of all subgroups containing $S$.
<div>$$ \langle S \rangle = \bigcap_{\substack{H \leq G \\ S \subset H }}{H} $$</div>
The family of subgroups containing $S$ is clearly non-empty; it has $G$. Moreover, its intersection must be a subgroup as well, hence  generated subgroups are well-defined.

***Definition.*** If a group $G$ is generated by a finite subset, we call it *finitely generated*.

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** If $S$ is a non-empty subset of a group $G$, then $\langle S \rangle$ is the set of all elements of the form $x_1^{\epsilon_1}\ldots x_k^{\epsilon_k}$ where $\epsilon_i = \pm 1$, $x_i \in S$, and $k \leq 0$ (when $k = 0$, the product is to be interpreted as $1$).

*Proof.* 
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Suppose $G$ is a group and consider $S \subset S' \subset G$. Then $\langle S \rangle \subset \langle S' \rangle$.

*Proof.* 
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

## Stuff with $HK$

***Definition.*** Two subgroups $H$ and $K$ are said to *permute* if $HK = KH$. A subgroup that permutes with all other subgroups is called *permutable* or *quasinormal*.

<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** Let $H$ and $K$ be subgroups of the same group. Then, $HK$ is a subgroup iff $H$ and $K$ permute. In this case, we find $HK = \langle H, K \rangle$.

*Proof.* 
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>


<div class="compact" markdown>
***Theorem.*** (Dedekind's modular law) Let $H$, $K$, $L$ be subgroups of the same group and assume that $K \subset L$. Then $(HK) \cap L = (H \cap L)K$. In particular, we get $\langle H, K \rangle = \langle H \cap L, K \rangle$ whenever $H$ and $K$ permute.

*Proof.* 
<span style="float: right">$\square$</span>
</div>

## The lattice of subgroups
